---
title: "Design and Development of a Powered Myoelectric Elbow Orthosis for Neuromuscular Injuries"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/MM24
date: 2024-08-17
venue: 'Military Medicine'
citation: 'Claudio Vignola, <i><b>Sandesh G Bhat</b></i>, Kevin Hollander, Paul Kane, Emily Miller, W. Brandon Martin, Alexander Shin, Thomas Sugar, Kenton Kaufman.'
---

[[Publication]](http://DrSGBhat.github.io/files/MM24.pdf)

## Abstract
* Introduction <br>
Recovering from neuromuscular injuries or conditions can be a challenging journey that involves complex surgeries and extensive physical rehabilitation. During this process, individuals often rely on orthotic devices to support and enable movement of the affected limb. However, users have criticized current commercially available powered orthotic devices for their bulky and heavy design. To address these limitations, we developed a novel powered myoelectric elbow orthosis.

* Materials and Methods <br>
The orthosis incorporates 3 mechanisms: a solenoid brake, a Bowden cable-powered constant torque elbow mechanism, and an extension limiter. The device controller and battery are in a backpack to reduce the weight on the affected arm. We performed extensive calculations and testing to ensure that the orthosis could withstand at least 15 Nm of elbow torque. We developed a custom software effectively control the orthosis, enhancing its usability and functionality. A certified orthotist fitted a subject who had undergone a gracilis free functioning muscle transfer surgery with the device. We studied the subject under Mayo clinic IRB no. 20-006849 and obtained objective measurements to assess the orthosis’s impact on upper extremity functionality during daily activities.

* Results <br>
The results are promising since the orthosis significantly improved elbow flexion range of motion by 40° and reduced compensatory movements at the shoulder (humerothoracic joint) by 50°. Additionally, the subject was able to perform tasks which were not possible before, such as carrying a basket with weights, highlighting the enhanced functionality provided by the orthosis.

* Conclusion <br>
In brief, by addressing the limitations of existing devices, this novel powered myoelectric elbow orthosis offers individuals with neuromuscular injuries/conditions improved quality of life. Further research will expand the patient population and control mechanisms.
